---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-03-04T08:36:49.911Z'
dateModified: '2016-03-04T08:00:07.981Z'
title: ''
author: []
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-04-9be04cf2-8f0b-4be2-a116-aae559bbca70.md
published: true
url: 9be04cf2-8f0b-4be2-a116-aae559bbca70/index.html
_type: Article

---
The Arab Migration

Kent, U.K, 1981: A man is sitting at a small coffee shop, enjoying his lunch and going through the daily newspaper. He has no idea that his entire life is about to change. In a year, this man will become my father.

My mother and him had just completed their Msc Degrees in the UK, no future plans in sight,  and he came across a small ad in a newspaper. It stated:

**_"Agricultural Engineer required to work for the Ministry of Agriculture and Works in the State of Bahrain"_**

Two months later, my father was on a flight to Bahrain, unaware that the next 30 something years of his life would lead him and his family to call this small Island home.

My father has and to this day works for the same Government Ministry he joined 34 years ago . My mother also still works at the same Ministry.

Their  children were born here. We grew up here, went to school here, got our first jobs here.  As far as we were concerned, this was home.

After graduating medical school, I joined Salmaniya Hospital to complete my Internship year, and then I was at home for about a year looking for a job. It was then that the 2011 "Arab Spring" events in Bahrain occurred. Those first 3-6 months were an emotional roller coaster to say the least. I can honestly say that those events have definitely left a permanent change in me to this day. Watching the only place you call home turn into complete anarchy, chaos, there was so much HATE within the fabric of Bahrain. It was a tough time, and most of us are still healing.  

Later that year, I joined another large hospital to begin my residency.

I felt a sense of patriotism. I wanted to work not only because I wanted to earn a decent living, to be ambitious,  but because I felt I wanted to do something great for this country. To do my part in making this country something to be proud of.

Fast forward to 4 years later...

In a few months, my wife and I will be moving to Dubai.

This was one of the toughest decisions of my life to make, and it took me many months of thinking, analysing and doubting before I made that choice.

Why?

Because Bahrain took everything I had to offer; my work ethic, my love for this country, my ambitions and killed them all. 

After a while, speaking with friends in different industries I began to realise that this was not something personal, something that only I was feeling, it was something that most of the young Bahraini workforce were experiencing. They felt underappreciated and ignored. Any initiative to do something "different" or new is usually met with a brick wall, unless for some ethical or unethical reason you have access to the ears of a high rank Executive. That, along with the lower financial rewards in comparison with the rest of the GCC has created what some would call " a migration of Bahraini talent" to other GCC countries, in search of a chance to be part of something great, to have your work appreciated and rewarded.

For me, Bahrain will always be home, where my family and earliest memories exist. But I have more ambition than to work a mind numbing Government position for the rest of my adult life, achieving nothing of value, receiving my pension fund and living out the rest of my days. Im better than that. 

I'm not saying that if you move to the UAE or anywhere else that all yours dreams and ambitions will come true. No, it takes a lot of hard work, but at least I have the**OPPORTUNITY**there. Thats all we ever wanted, an opportunity to grow, to be and do something of value and to be rewarded for our work , not just financially, but also by giving credit where credit is due. Which ironically, is probably the same reason my father chose to make his move 30 something years ago.

So, here's to new beginnings. I may or may not regret the decision I made, all I know is that I couldn't live with myself if I didn't take the chance and find out.